ACKNOWLEDGEMENT STATE BANK
OF SAURASHTRA (CALCUTTA)
VIJAY RAY, SANDIP RAY, PARIMAL ROY,
JAGANNATH DUTTA, SALEN MANNA,
HILLOL DAS, JOTISH CHAKRABORTY
BISHWANATH AGARWAL, CHHAYA BANI
R.D.B. & CO., MIHIR
ADDY ANIL CHOWDHARY
SARBARI ROY CHOWDHARY
GOPAL SEN, SUDHANSHU BANERJEE
THE GRAMAPHONE CO. OF INDIA LTD.
MUSIC OF SATYAJIT RAY
CINEMATOGRAPHY SOUMENDU RAY, PANTU NAG
COMMENTRY ANITA MUKHERJEE
WRITTEN BY DIPENDU CHAKRABORTY
CHIEF ASSISTANT
DIRECTOR PRABIR GANGULY
EDITOR BULU GHOSH
ILLUSTRATIONS SATYAJIT RAY
SCRIPT & DIRECTION
UTPALENDU CHAKRABORTY
"GHARE BAIRE" 1984
Hello,
- Tell me.
One two three four
Play like this correctly.
Brother, Play the drum,
that line is tricky.
Ta taam, Yeah, Yeah that's it.
One two three, now its your turn.
Vande Mataram, Vande Mataram
See, I'll say Vande Mataram,
Vande Mataram, Vande Mataram.
Good morning uncle
One two three four
First, first, Amal you begin the song.
Vande Mataram, Vande Mataram,
Vande Mataram Vande Mataram,
Like his films the music of Satyajit
Ray is a unique multi-layered...
...blending of western
sense and Indian sensibility.
His complete mastery of this
art form is a culmination...
...of a long family tradition.
I was born in a musical family,
my grandfather UpendraKishore...
...was a composer, violinist.
He played the flute,
he played the pakhawaj.
And on my mother's side,
...my mother's
grandfather KaliNarayan Gupta,...
...was a wonderful composer and...
...it so happens that
on my mothers side...
...practically
everyone is a natural singer.
My grandmother could sing
and all her sisters could sing.
My mother could sing and my
mother's sisters, brothers...
...and cousin were
all natural singers.
So I grew up in an
atmosphere of music and...
...singing Rabindra Sangeet...
...and Brahma Sangeet,
right from my birth.
I have been exposed to western
classical music from a very early age.
There were some records of
classical music in my house.
I don't know where they came from...
...but I had heard
Beethoven's works...
...and some other western
music from when I was a small boy.
I had a gramophone,
...a toy gramophone and some
small records given to me...
...as a birthday present
which consisted of all,...
...all of it was western music
waltzes, marches and all that.
so western music has
never been unfamiliar to me.
I was exposed to it and I had
heard it along with Bengali songs...
...and Bengali music I was
listening to western music,
...of some kind or...
...other and it developed into
a very serious interest when...
...I was at school.
Towards the end when I
was thirteen fourteen.
I had a friend at school...
...who was came from
fairly well to do family.
And he also got
interested in western music and...
...he started buying records.
It was in his house that I was
able to listen to music of...
...Bach Beethoven,
Mozart's, Tchaikovsky.
So I got initiated very very
early when I was at school.
When other boys were
writing poetry or reading poetry.
I was listening to music...
...reading about it
going to libraries because...
...I couldn't afford to buy books.
Reading about composers and
compositions and musical forms.
So it was a very early initiation.
"Pather Panchali" Satyajit Ray
Well this was at the
time of chiliarchy,
I had worked with Ravi Shankar.
In "PATHER PANCHALI",
...Ray made a major breakthrough in,
Indian film music,...
...not only by using the gifts of a
classical composer like Ravi Shankar...
...but also by exploiting them...
...from an essentially
cinematic point of view.
His collaborations with
several classical composers...
...in the next few films created,
...a new idiom of film music in India.
On "Jalsaghar" I had
worked with Vilayat Khan.
(Story based on Prabhat
Kumar Mukhopadhyay's DEVI)
And on "Devi" I had
worked with Ali Akbar.
But they had become very
busy international composers;
they were not always
available when I needed them and...
...I did not want to
dictate other composers.
So at the time of "Teen
Kanya" in 1960, I think,...
I decided to try my
own hand at composition.
It was very
difficult to start with but,
...eventually in course of time...
...I managed to
acquire some professionalism.
TITLE MUSIC
Satyajit Ray Production Presents:
Story based on Rabindranath
Tagore's Postmaster, Manihar, Samapti
"TEEN KANYA" (The Three Girls)
It was in "Teen Kanya"...
...that Ray proved that, as
film music is one of the...
...components of a film a
director of musical background,...
...is the fittest person to
do the scoring for his film.
From "Teen Kanya" onwards,
...Ray employed in each film
a theme music to underline...
...its central mood and
to suggest elite motive...
...in the multiplex
structure of the film.
Film Music and Direction Satyajit Ray
"Samapti"
Laksmi
An increasing stress...
...on natural sounds and
particularly silence and the...
"Kanchen Jungha" 1962
... sparing use of
musical accompaniment are...
...2 important features of Ray's music
There is something I want to say.
He is a great man as we
belong to the new generation,...
...so the association,
particularly between him and us.
I should leave.
- No wait, what I am saying is
I have been looking for you,
for quite a long time. - I know.
Sir please give me some money,
Sir please give me some money.
Take, this is yours.
Good day, Sir.
Jagdish... Banerjee...
Banerjee, Manisha... Jagdish
"Mahanagar"
R. D. Bansal Presents
Satyajit Ray's Mahanagar
Staring:
Anil Chattopadhyay;
Madhavi Mukhopadhyay.
Original story: Narendranath Mitra
Such a big city!
So many different kinds of jobs.
Could none of us find one?
Let us try, I believe
we both will find one.
You know, today amidst all this grief,
...where we do not know
what destiny holds for us...
...I still feel good.
You are not afraid anymore. Are you?
See.
Let's go.
- Let's go.
Ideally, I think the
director should be aware,...
...where music would
be needed in his film.
This is, I am talking of
the ideal situation...
...where it is assumed that...
...the director knows about music,
...is conscious of music and also...
...knows where his
films would call for music.
But of course the ideal
situation doesn't always exist...
and have directors who have
very little conception of music.
Where of course...
...he has to depend entirely
on the professionals composers.
There you have to assume that...
... the professional
composer is a competent composer.
But in my case of course,
...since I have been
aware of music,...
...from a very early age and
music has been my first love...
... even before the cinema.
And since I do my own composition
I have very set ideas about...
...where music should
be used in the film.
The flowers nod as if
intoxicated "Charu lata".
The most satisfying
experience to Ray as a music director.
Even the structure of the film with...
...its subtle inner links is musical.
A singing female parrot
tantalizes the surging wave even as...
...the cuckoo coos from its arbor.
After the introduction of sound,
in their days very early...
...there was no music in films.
As you can see,
...if you see the films of
early 1930s, there is very often...
...no music at all.
But gradually the system of background
music came into being and...
...professional composers
emerged and big offices emerged.
There was a period then in the
40s or later it is when music
A film would be drowned in music.
But even later after that...
...of course a kind of
balance was struck and...
...music was used very discreetly.
But also at the same time
certain conventions developed.
Like using a certain kind of
music for happy situations,...
...a certain kind of
music for sad situations,...
...another kind of music for
situations of suspense and...
...these became formulas.
Sometimes lazy composers would
use these formulas rather than...
...think those situations afresh.
We naturally tried to avoid these...
... hackneyed formulas
as much as possible.
I think all directors
should avoid hackneyed formulas.
Consider a situation
afresh and try to be original...
...and avoid conventions
avoid worn-out conventions.
The call of cuckoo
The pain of cuckoo
My village
What's the matter?
See.
In my case of course, I use
music now less and less and less.
"Sadgati" 1981.
There are some directors in the west,
as an example Bergman,...
...who hardly ever uses
any music in his films.
But we still do use music,
partly because,
...out of
consideration for the audience,...
...because sometimes the audience,
we feel the less
intelligent audience...
...would not be able
to comprehend the moods,
...the changes in mood.
Therefore we underline
those changes those moods...
by means of background music.
But even so I would say I use
music as discreetly as possible.
Ray's musical genius finds its
brilliant expression in the lyrics...
...and tunes he
composed for his films.
My first original lyric
was written for "Devi".
But the tune was not my own...
...it was based on the
conventional Ramprasadi tune.
The words were my own.
I shall wander house to
house asking for alms to survive.
But I shall never come back
to you calling you oh! Mother.
Mother, I shall not call you mother
henceforth as you have given me...
...and you are still
giving me such torments.
Mother, I shall not call you mother.
But my first original song
both lyric and tune and...
...orchestration was
for "Chiriyakhana".
This was the song
"Bhalobasha tumi ki jaano"...
...which is supposed to
occur in an old Bengali film.
With legs placed one on the other.
An open book of accounts and
engrossed in your own thoughts.
I keep saying that its dawn but
you don't seem to listen to me.
What is it that you know of love?
Then I got
interested in writing songs...
...and found an
opportunity to write songs.
When I decided to make a film...
...of my grandfather's
short story "Gupi Gaayin".
Based on
Upendrakishore Raichoudhary's story
Gupi Gaayin Baagha Baayin
Gupi's Character Tapan Chatterjee
Baagha's Character Ravi Ghosh
Other Characters
Johar Rai, Santosh Dutta,
Harindranath Chattopadhyay,
Prasad Mukhopadhyay, Chinmoy Rai,
Durgadas Banerjee, Shanti Chatterjee,
Haridhan Mukhopadhyay, Ashok Mitra,
Khogen Pathak, Nrupati Chaterjee,
Govind Chakravaty, Kamu Mukherjee,
Romenbhaduri,Ajay Banerjee,
Avani Mukherjee, Rajkumar Lahir,
Gopal Dey Dilip Basu(Guest),
Rattan Banerjee, Binay Dutta,
Tarun Mitra, Dr. Balai Das,
Preeti Majumdar, Shailaig Ganguly,
Mani Shreemani.
It became an elaborate musical film,
...and for it I wrote about...
...seven or eight or nine songs.
I started by writing
some of the songs...
...even before I wrote the scenario,
I imagined some of the situations...
...that would occur in the film and...
...I wanted to find out...
...whether I could be able
to compose songs for the film.
I wrote three or four as a try out...
...and when it turned out that...
...they were quite satisfactory
I decided to make the film.
Emperor, we salute you
We come from the country of Bengal
We are simple living men...
...who wander off to
different kingdom.
We are simple living men...
...who wander off to
different kingdom.
Our language is different and
we do not know your language.
Oh Emperor...
Mr. Emperor.
But we know a different language
...and we feel
satisfied to sing for you...
...as we come for that.
King, Oh Emperor.
We sing in that same language
Oh mighty King listen to our
song to your hearts satisfaction.
It is the language of rhythm,
the language of rhyme,
the language of tempo,
the language of joy.
The language spoken is such
that it is understood by all.
that it is understood by all...
rich or poor big or
small all are the same.
Rich or poor big or
small all are the same...
...so I sing in this language,
So I sing in this language,
I sing the song.
Oh! Emperor my salute to you.
"Hirak Rajar Deshe" 1980
Sing...
Where is the song?
Sa Re Ga
- Ga Ga Ga
We are finished
Sa Ga Ma Ga
Where is the song?
I beg of you
I beg of you Tiger uncle
Please do not be annoyed uncle.
Who would have known that
you would be in the room?
You in this room Room.
Who would have known that
you would be in the room?
It is like having lightening
without having any clouds.
Lightening without clouds
The work being almost done
For havens sake please be calm Uncle.
Who would have known that
you would be in the room
If my neck, if ever my
neck is attacked by your paws.
oh my oh my, if ever my
I know what shall happen to me.
Two fresh lives will be
lost forever Fresh 2 live.
Will be lost I know two
fresh lives will be lost.
Who would have known that
you would be in the room
Brother Baagha, tell me how
many diamonds have you taken
Do we have time for that genius.
Still I would like to
know how many you have taken
I have taken enough
Then there is no need
to take any more
No need to take any more
come now let's run away
Come now let's run away
We've achieved the
goal with great difficulty
That's more than enough
His latest experiment
in music in Ghare Baire.
Like Tagore in his songs and...
...Ravi Shankar in
his instrumental music,
Ray has blended western and
Indian elements to create...
...his own distinctive musical
form and he has succeeded where...
...others have
failed in Indian cinema.
H M V Recording studio
One two three four
The fifth key has a vibrar
key note... there watch out
Number 5
- 8...
...Ma dha pa
On mid note the fifth
note should fall. - Yes.
How will that happen? What yes?
Where are you placing it?
Number 8 I will place it at eight.
I'm looking at eight itself.
- The one on eight
There is no getting
away from the fact,
...that no other film
director in India...
...has demonstrated the same
command of film music as Ray.
Rays music is
imaginative not melodramatic,
balanced not exuberant,
functional not decorative.
It is music that grows
from the film itself.
It seems, that Indian cinema is
not prepared yet, to adopt,...
...the language of Ray's music.
Stop!
Its okay.
1-2-3-4, 1-2-3-4, continue
playing for every piece.
It has been my intention right
from the beginning to work...
...as an independent composer.
not in opposition with other
professional composers in music...
...but only for my own pleasure,
I do it because I love doing it.
I love composing songs, I love
composing background music and...
...that is what I have been
doing with one or two exceptions...
...I have worked for one
or two other composers.
Other directors in other films...
...such as well for
instance Shakespeare Voila.
But as a rule and...
...this is going to be a rule
not only for now for future also...
...I shall work only for myself.
Based On Satyaji Ray
Upendrakishore Roy
Chowdary Rabindranath Tagore
Processed & Developed
Bombay Film Labs Pvt. Ltd.
Re Recording Mangesh Desai
Rajkamal Kalamandir Pvt. Ltd.
Still Photo Nemai Ghosh
Bangsi Chandra Gupta & Durgadas Mitra
Production Controller Sudip Kr. Bose
Assistants Camera
Purnendu Bose, Anil Ghosh,
Gupinath Roy, Dilip Banerjee.
Editing Rathindranath Bose
Director Debabrata Dutta
Production Ajit Pandey, Rattan Das.